April 19th 2017 - Guest speaker

Questions:
How did you first start out as a journalist?
How did you learn data journalism? Were the intricacies of data journalism difficult for you to pick up?
What classes did you take at Stanford? What did you learn from them?
What did Dan Nguyen teach you, what was your favorite piece of advise from him as a data journalism specialist?
Lost & Found app - amazing! Sense of impact? 
Role of SIR with government data? How much do they utilize/work with the same data bases? 

Notes from talk
The lost and found project
CBS: Journalism 
PBS Newshour: after undergrad - rotated among the different desks (assistant editor for education), managed a website
Web development 
Put all your code, even your terrible code, on Github
Templating language - one thing she knew how to do, Googled her way through things 
“Write templates for this”, she would do research, pretend to do what she was doing, do a ton of research 
Reveal CIR- The Lost & The Found: Federal data tracks thousands of unsolved missing persons cases and unidentified bodies. Use this tool to search for potential matches, Namus (missing person reports, unidentified body reports) - 2 different sites, don’t show photos until 3 clicks down
She added metadata in site so you can filter together or dynamically with keywords = clearer data set, application was part of the larger project, team won an award 
Learning to be in data journalism
Get a project!!
The project must have stakes: be accountable to people that give you tasks
Go to meetups with other folks who do what you do, become their friend for real: community rather than professional workshop, collaborative environment
Share your code/stories/graphics with those people and get them to share with you 
Get comfortable in not knowing what you’re doing. 
Do uncomfortable things over and over until they make sense 
When learning quickly, you will feel ashamed of code you wrote weeks/months ago
Who do you think this site was made for? (USA Spending)
Brown: advanced data search 
Made for people who paid for the site, in congress, Benefits journalists too, show pieces for people who made them
Who uses this data? Target audience? Journalist is obvious, competitive businesses
Charging many thousands of dollars a year for access to it - people who were focused on business intelligence, people from federal government, selling it back to the government for tons of money
Open source and cheap applications - are her way of doing data journalism 
This interface does not do a good job at making data accessible 
Ton of data that is available, doesn’t mean it’s accessible, bridging gap between accessible and available 
‘Open contractors’
How can this be accessible? Turning data points into pieces of information that sit in context with one another (into graphs, sentences that people can read)
Created a prototype of interface, search for companies, what are the most common services in the govt., questions that you could answer already but easier to access
Creating understandable context for data points
Still working with Reveal: investigative journalism 
apps.revealnews.ord/border-wall/
Only place where you can see a map of where the border wall is (dangerous data to the United States
Send reporters to the border, use satellite imagery of where the border wall is, why it is the way it is
Combined data with satellite imagery 
Combining data application with on ground investigations - nobody else had done this, work with satellite imagery
Advise projects, helping people make their stuff better
Creating tool for other journalists
Sample data set before expanding it to the whole thing, sample data set is hugely massive (mistake?), might as well done the whole thing
DOD - most scrutiny, takes up largest part of proprietary budget
Lost & Found app
Sense of impact? Did it make a difference? Strange case - missing person had a glass eye, distinct physical marker. Missing person picture - his eye is skewed, he’s wearing blue shirt, brown leather jacket - somebody matched it with unidentified person, pictures of clothing, fun to solve dead persons case 
7 years it was reported on, data part went on for 4 months
Site with pictures - hidden to ensure secrecy and gruesomeness
Overlayed a picture, with blur
Working with government data sets - why aren’t the government doing this already?
They don’t have to, don’t want to spend money on it
SIR: did they have things figured out? 
lostandfound.revealnews.org
To find anything on site, you need to make decisions, e.g. women, native american, went missing within this date → affects the information it gives back to you, playful experience (play with parameters, not stuck with certain info)
Job search as data journalist 
Some places know what your role should entail 
Employers - skill? Questions? 
Show that you can learn quickly, go to place to find knowledge, finding solution you need 
Nobody knows everything about data/info - talk to government people, find resources to figure out whatever you need to know 
Portfolio - know how to use more than 1 type of data, ability to learn quickly 
Hopeful that you have technical skills: data journalists know how to look at their data/what to pull out of the information, different ideas of what a story is, know that a story is more interesting than a sql query (not just about application but reporting around that) 
Reason attracted to data journalism?
Adding data to your skills puts your pay up, stay on, adds security, competing against people that are journalists and became developers, very rare that people go from computer science to data journalism 
Taqueria’s - strong opinions 

Monday 10th April
Matt Carroll interview
https://twitter.com/mattcdata?lang=en

Questions:
Living in Boston - how do you think this location influence your journalism skill set/passion for journalism
What would you say is your key piece of advice for undergrads who want to become journalists
What is your favorite data journalism application to use? What do you recommend we do as new data journalists? (to learn how to utilize applications)

Party whip is the name given to an official of a political party whose task is to ensure party discipline in a legislature. Whips are the party's "enforcers",

https://trends.google.com/trends/?cat= 

Looked at Tableu: download, work



